Open Access

Peer-reviewed

Research Article

# Feeling What an Insect Feels

  * Abdenbi Mohand Ousaid  ,

* E-mail: mohand_ousaid@isir.upmc.fr

Affiliation ISIR - Institut des Systmes Intelligents et de Robotique,
Sorbonne Universits, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR 7222, Paris, France



  * Guillaume Millet,

Affiliation ISIR - Institut des Systmes Intelligents et de Robotique,
Sorbonne Universits, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR 7222, Paris, France



  * Sinan Haliyo,

Affiliation ISIR - Institut des Systmes Intelligents et de Robotique,
Sorbonne Universits, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR 7222, Paris, France



  * Stphane Rgnier,

Affiliation ISIR - Institut des Systmes Intelligents et de Robotique,
Sorbonne Universits, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR 7222, Paris, France



  * Vincent Hayward

Affiliations ISIR - Institut des Systmes Intelligents et de Robotique,
Sorbonne Universits, UPMC Univ Paris 06, UMR 7222, Paris, France, CNRS, UMR
7222, Paris, France



# Feeling What an Insect Feels

  * Abdenbi Mohand Ousaid, 
  * Guillaume Millet, 
  * Sinan Haliyo, 
  * Stphane Rgnier, 
  * Vincent Hayward 

x

  * Published: October 1, 2014
  * https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0108895

  * Article
  * Authors
  * Metrics
  * Comments
  * Media Coverage

  * Reader Comments (0)
  * Media Coverage 
  * Figures

## Figures

## Abstract

We describe a manually operated, bilateral mechanical scaling instrument that
simultaneously magnifies microscopic forces and reduces displacements with
quasi-perfect transparency. In contrast with existing micro-teleoperation
designs, the system is unconditionally stable for any scaling gains and
interaction curves. In the present realization, the work done by the hand is
more than a million times that done by a microscopic probe so that one can
feel complete interaction cycles with water and compare them to what is felt
when an insect leg interacts with a wet surface.

**Citation:** Mohand Ousaid A, Millet G, Haliyo S, Rgnier S, Hayward V (2014)
Feeling What an Insect Feels. PLoS ONE 9(10): e108895.
https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0108895

 **Editor:** Bruce R. Donald, Duke University, United States of America

 **Received:** March 8, 2014; **Accepted:** August 26, 2014; **Published:**
October 1, 2014

 **Copyright:**  2014 Mohand Ousaid et al. This is an open-access article
distributed under the terms of the Creative Commons Attribution License, which
permits unrestricted use, distribution, and reproduction in any medium,
provided the original author and source are credited.

 **Data Availability:** The authors confirm that all data underlying the
findings are fully available without restriction. The raw data underlying the
findings are represented in the paper and in the supporting information files
in Figs. 4, 5A, 5B, 5C, 6B, 6C, and 7.

 **Funding:** The work is supported by the European Research Council (FP7) ERC
Advanced Grant (patch) to VH (No. 247300) and the French National Agency of
Research, through the PACMAN project to SR. The funders had no role in study
design, data collection and analysis, decision to publish, or preparation of
the manuscript.

 **Competing interests:** The authors have declared that no competing
interests exist.

## Introduction

The cantilevered atomic force microscope [1] is an advance that can be
compared with that of the optical microscope [2], since it gave access to the
mechanical microworld like the microscope gave access to the optical
microworld. However, unlike the optical microscope, the atomic force
microscope is a scanning device and thus does not easily lend itself to be an
interactive instrument: observations are made accessible to the users in the
form of grids of data points that can be visualized offline.

The transformation of the atomic force microscope into an interactive
instrument was previously attempted using conventional teleoperation
approaches [3][5], where scaled position and force signals are cross-linked
between slave and master manipulator devices [6], [7]. When treating the
atomic force microscope like a slave manipulator, however, the phases of
interaction where the probe tip is attracted to a sample are inherently
unstable and thus inaccessible to direct human experience. In the present
realization, this shortcoming was eliminated by employing an active probe that
could track the entirety of tip-sample microscopic interaction curves.

Teleoperation theory shows that in conventional systems the choice of scaling
gains is fundamentally limited [8], [9]. In the present design, the active
probe was coupled to a novel force-feedback user interface that closely
approximated a pure force generator, realizing a mechanical scaling instrument
that was unconditionally stable for any scaling gains, while maintaining
quasi-ideal transparency in the frequency range relevant to human interaction.
During operation, the user felt as if she or he was directly interacting with
an enlarged replica of the sample where the macroscopic exchange of mechanical
work done by the hand was six-seven orders of magnitude larger than that
taking place in the microscopic world.

The broad principle of an ideal mechanical scaling instrument may be described
by one of the two hypothetical devices shown in Figures 1A, B. A probe
interacting with a sample moves by an amount, , where to each displacement, ,
corresponds a force, , possibly not uniquely. Scaling up a microscopic
interaction requires an external source of power since the work, , performed
by the hand should be orders of magnitude larger than the work, , performed by
the probe. If  is the displacement of the handle and if  is the force applied
by the hand, then , where the value of the product, , should be at least a
million in micro-scale applications (1.0 N  1.0 N, 1.0 m  1.0 mm).

Download:

  * PPT 

PowerPoint slide

  * PNG 

larger image

  * TIFF 

original image

Figure 1.  Ideal mechanical scaling instrument.

(A, B) Two possible signal causality schemes. (A) The probe is an ideal force
generator, it has no mass and is infinitely compliant. The handle is
infinitely rigid and imposes scaled up displacements. Scaled down hand
interaction forces are reflected to the probe. (B) The probe is infinitely
rigid and imposes scaled down displacements to the sample. Scaled up probe
interaction forces are applied to the hand through an ideal force generator.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0108895.g001

The scaled mechanical work transferred from the sample to the probe can be
either generative or dissipative. In the microscopic world, such inversions
are commonplace, for instance at the onset of adhesion where the probe is
suddenly attracted to the sample. Considering that the work to be scaled up is
at all times the product of force and displacement, two options are available
to us to constrain the hand to perform a scaled-up replica of the work
performed by the probe. In one option, see Figure 1A, the probe is arranged to
have sufficiently high mobility  mobility is the ratio of velocity to force 
in order to apply small controlled forces regardless of its movements. These
probe forces are scaled-down versions of the measured forces applied by the
hand onto the handle. Concomitantly, measured probe displacements are relayed
to the hand through an ideal velocity generator that imposes scaled up
displacements to the hand overcoming any force it applies. In the other
option, see Figure 1B, the probe must have sufficiently low mobility and the
measured forces of the microscopic interaction are transmitted in amplified
form to the hand through a high mobility force generator. At the same time,
the measured hand displacements are scaled down and imposed to the probe by an
ideal velocity generator.

The two options are in principle equivalent, but in practice they are quite
different. In the option of Figure 1A, a high mobility probe can be realized
by a compliant cantilever with a probing tip, similar to atomic force
microscope implementations. The specification of interaction forces
independently from the tip movements then requires to displace the cantilever
base at high speeds and with high amplitudes, which is difficult. The
realization of the user interface is also difficult. The force of interaction
between the hand and the handle can be confounded with spurious dynamic forces
owing to the fast movements of the handle. With the option of Figure 1B, the
realization of a low mobility probe is easily accomplished using a micro-
positioner. However, the requirement for low mobility of the probe conflicts
with that for force sensitivity. We resolved this conundrum by using feedback
in an active compensation scheme to convert a high mobility, actuated probe
into a low mobility probe, while preserving sensitivity. On the user side, the
realization of a force generator of low mobility intended to interact with the
hand is difficult because the dynamics of actuators are typically of second-
order. Closed-loop control therefore requires acceleration feedback, which is
hard to stabilize robustly. We solved this problem by arranging the primary
force generator to have inherent first-order dynamics. The scaling down of
displacements is straightforward.

We realized a practical mechanical scaling instrument following the option
represented in Figure 2A. For brevity, in the foregoing no distinction is made
between forces and torques. The feedback system of the probe comprised a
differential electrostatic actuator having a linear transfer characteristic
[10] and an optical lever to detect its position. The position of the sample
relative to the probe was determined by a micro-positioner made of a voice-
coil motor acting against an elastic suspension. The central component of the
user interface, the force generator, was a viscous coupler based on the
principle of Foucault currents. These non-contact devices have a near-perfect
viscous behavior as long as slip velocity is below a critical value [11]. The
armature was a thin disk of aluminum of low inertia and the relationship
between input slip velocity and output torque was of first order. The output
torque was proportional to the relative velocity between the rotor (motor-1)
and the armature (motor-2 and handle). The control system diagrammed in Figure
3 was designed to provide properties closely approaching that of the ideal
mechanical scaling device of Figure 1B.

Download:

  * PPT 

PowerPoint slide

  * PNG 

larger image

  * TIFF 

original image

Figure 2.  Practical realization of the second scheme.

(A) Differential electrostatic comb drive with a moving armature suspended by
a network of glass fibers. The probe, connected to the moving armature,
interacts with a sample that is moved by a micro-positioner in response to the
handle movements. The position of the probe is detected by an optical lever.
The position signal is sent to the control system which returns an actuator
control voltage that nulls the probe displacement. The control system drives
the hand interface by servoing the velocity of motor-1, transmitting torque
via a Foucault-current coupler to the handle attached to motor-2. Because the
torques add on a common shaft, motor-2 can fill in the missing transients. The
forces transmitted to the hand do not include the inertial forces arising from
the movements of the large motor-1. (B) Physical realization of active probe.
(C) Physical realization of the hand interface. (D) Detail of the fiber
suspension guiding the actuator armature along rectilinear movements with high
compliance. The two mechanically grounded armatures are assigned voltages  and
respectively and the moving armature voltage . It can be shown that if  and
are such that , and if  is fixed to a constant value, the actuator force, , is
given by , where  is the actuator capacitance. The actuator force is thus
proportional to  [10].

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0108895.g002

Download:

  * PPT 

PowerPoint slide

  * PNG 

larger image

  * TIFF 

original image

Figure 3.  Control scheme.

Computational signals and blocks are in blue and physical signals are in red.
The control, , looped around the probe, , is designed to achieve high
stiffness. Electrostatic forces are at all times equal to the interaction
forces. The force generator operates with a velocity control, , and feed-
forward compensation taken from the force error signal, . Crucially, the
physical summation nodes (red) combine force signals without approximations.
Nodes 1 and 2 represent Newton's second law. Node 3 represents the viscous
force corresponding to the slip velocity of the coupler. Computational
summation nodes are all associated to error terms.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0108895.g003

## Materials and Methods

### Active probe

The probe was designed around a bipolar differential electrostatic actuator
about 1.0 cm in scale generating a force proportionally to the voltage
applied, see Figure 2B, D. The moving armature carrying the probe was
suspended by a system of five glass fibers that provided exact kinematic
guidance along one direction with no mechanical hysteresis. The optical lever
comprised an external laser source, a mirror attached to the carrier and an
external, four quadrant photodiode. The system exhibited a natural angular
frequency of 64 rad/s and a stiffness of 4.0 N/m. In the foregoing,  is the
Laplace variable.

Feedback control, shown in Figure 3 (left feedback loop), overcame the
limitations related to passive sensors by stiffening the probe actively. The
probe-sample interaction, , gave rise to a force, , that tended to deflect the
probe to a measured position, . The compensator, , forced the probe, , to null
the position error, . The known actuator force, , then was, within the
controller bandwidth, an accurate replica of the interaction force, , acting
as an input disturbance, . The range of forces that can be handled by the
active probe was 400 N. With a resolution of 0.4 N, measurements could be
made with a dynamic range of three orders of magnitude and the sensitivity was
well within the range of capillary forces.

In Figure 3, node  represents the summation of the forces acting on the moving
armature of the actuator. Equilibrium was achieved in a wide range of
conditions owing to the robust stability properties of the feedback within the
control bandwidth, and when it was smaller than the actuator saturation level.
The position feedback controller was optimally designed using  procedures
[12]. The numerical expressions of the probe and of the controller transfer
functions are given in the supporting information, file Text S1, equations (1)
and (2). For accuracy, all design procedures for the control system (Figure 3,
continuous time) were carried out in the discrete time domain with a sampling
period of 1.0 ms.

The sample was displaced by a micro-positioner to a position . Its transfer
function, , could be for all practical purposes taken to be unity, .

### User interface

The force-feedback user interface comprised two stages as shown by Figures 2A,
C. It had a large motor (motor-1) that produced torque transfered to a small
motor (motor-2) through a Foucault-current viscous coupler. The small motor
was rigidly connected to a handle having very low inertia. The large motor
(Maxon RE-35-273754) drove the inductor of the coupler. The inductor was
fitted with sixty 20 mm2 neodymium magnets. The rotor was a 1 mm thick, 52 mm
outer diameter aluminum annulus. The shaft positions of the two motors were
detected by high-resolution digital encoders (MicroE Mercury M1800). The
coupler's viscous coefficient was 8.7 104 N m s .

A velocity feedback controller,  (see Figure 3 right feedback loop), set the
velocity of motor-1, , to achieve a desired force output, . The controller was
implemented as a discrete-time, polynomial pole-placement compensator that
ensured robust regulation and tracking performance [13]. The numerical
expressions of the controller and the reference model are given in supporting
information, file Text S1, equations (3) to (6).

Since the bandwidth of human voluntary movements was well within the bandwidth
of the velocity control loop, the dynamics of motor-1 was entirely eliminated
from the user's haptic experience [14]. Nevertheless, the force signal to be
reproduced could contain fast components that the velocity servo loop could
not track. To fill-in the transients, a feed-forward path was provided through
the low-power, high-precision motor-2 (Maxon RE-16-118698). Because this motor
had negligible friction and inertia, unwanted forces could be kept below human
detection thresholds, achieving quasi-perfect transparency.

The quantitative evaluation of the transparency of the interface was reported
in [14]. It was designed to operate at the limits of human sensory detection
performance with an equivalent inertia of 5.2 g and a friction of 3.7 mN at
the finger contact with the manipulandum. The improved transparency of the
interface allowed users to detect details that were ten times smaller in
magnitude than those detected when using a conventional design.

The summation node  in Figure 3 represents the sum of all forces that acted on
motor-1, namely, the low-frequency viscous force arising from the coupler slip
velocity (node ), , the force applied by the user's hand, , and the transient
feed-forward error signal, . The position of the handle, that is of motor-2, ,
was scaled by a factor, , to determine the position, , of the sample.

### System closed-loop stability

It can be shown that such a system was stable for any bounded value of the
scaling factors,  and . Closed-loop stability was unconditional for any
nonlinear interactions between the probe and sample, , and between the handle
and hand, . In the worst case when no dissipation was present, a sufficient
proof of stability was achieved through the application of the Llewellyn's
absolute stability criterion [15], [16]. Alternatively, it can be verified
that all the system's poles had a negative real part and the real part of the
transfer function was positive over the entire bandwidth, from DC to 64 rad/s.
Passivity of the entire interaction chain was then guaranteed given that the
interconnection of linear time invariant passive systems yields a passive
system. Since , and since  up to the open-loop dynamics of the small motor, we
have  which means that the user felt a nearly exact replica of the probe-
sample interaction dynamics scaled by a factor, , without any gain-stability
trade-off.

## Results

The bilateral capability of the system was first tested by exploring the
interaction curve between a small fragment of a magnet and the point of a
sewing needle. When the feedback loop was inactive, the system behaved like an
atomic force microscope cantilever probe, exhibiting an unstable jump-to-
contact motion once the attraction force exceeded the elastic force
restraining the probe, see Figure 4. In contrast, the active probe could track
the entirety of the magnetic interaction force regardless of the proximity to
the sample, eliminating measurement hysteresis and the blind region, up to
actuator saturation.

Download:

  * PPT 

PowerPoint slide

  * PNG 

larger image

  * TIFF 

original image

Figure 4.  Active vs passive probe proving experiment.

A sewing needle tip interacts with a magnet. In passive mode, owing to the
high compliance of the probe, the interaction becomes unstable when the gap
becomes smaller than 0.8 mm, whereas, in active mode, the interaction remains
tractable down to 90 m, until the actuator saturates. In the active mode,
approach and retraction curves fall on top of each other, denoting absence of
hysteresis, and the gap may be arbitrarily small, subject to actuator
saturation (400 N). In the passive mode, the measurement is erroneous owing
to uncontrolled probe dynamics.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0108895.g004

The repeatability, the sensitivity, and the noise performance of the system
were then assessed. One hundred and seventy-five cyclical interactions with
the same droplet of water at a rate of one per second showed that the
measurements were repeatable, see Figure 5A, differing only by a small drift
from cycle to cycle. If the system was sensitive to capillary forces,
following the Young-Laplace law, the force measurements at pull-off should
depend on the probe diameter according to  where  is the probe radius and  the
surface tension. The interactions reported in Figure 5B showed that it was
indeed the case for probe diameters of 80, 140, and 200 m. Finally the noise
performance is reported in Figure 5C.

Download:

  * PPT 

PowerPoint slide

  * PNG 

larger image

  * TIFF 

original image

Figure 5.  System performance.

(A) One hundred and seventy-five repetitions of a cyclical interaction with
the same water droplet at a rate of one per second showing excellent
repeatability. The measurements differ by a small drift term owing to thermal
fluctuations and/or water evaporation. (B) The pull-off force is by and large
proportional to the probe diameter. (C) Noise spectral density of the unloaded
force sensor.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0108895.g005

The system was then validated by probing droplets of water with a glass
micropipette having a tip diameter of 80 m as illustrated by Figure 6A. The
different phases of the interaction were felt by the experimenter as if she or
he was directly touching the droplet, but with the difference that the
mechanical work done by the hand of the experimenter was at all times 3.5
million times larger than that of the probe as can be seen from the signals
shown in Figure 6B, C. When first touching the droplet surface, the
experimenter felt a sudden jolt, a step of  N in 50 ms visible in Figure 6C,
at the end of the approach phase, corresponding to the formation of the
meniscus at the instant of pull-in. Subsequently, the interaction force
increased with the penetration distance. This increase was likely to be due to
a combination of the enlargement of the meniscus and of the piston section
responding to the positive hydrostatic pressure inside the droplet. A reversed
movement during the retraction phase corresponded to a strong adhesive force
that increased to  N, that is 8.0 N in reality, see Figure 6B, C, where the
force becomes negative, until the contact snapped when the droplet was
deflected by 250 m from the initial contact at distance zero.

Download:

  * PPT 

PowerPoint slide

  * PNG 

larger image

  * TIFF 

original image

Figure 6.  Interaction of a glass probe with a droplet of water.

(A) Main interaction phases. (B) Evolution of the probe force, , as a function
of probe displacement and as a function of time. In the approach phase, the
force signals are reduced to noise. At the instant of contact, the probe is
suddenly attracted by the droplet owing to capillary forces. Penetrating the
droplet corresponds to a gradual increase of the interaction force. Retraction
inverts the sign of the force and the interaction exhibits large hysteresis
until the contact snaps off when exceeding a given deflection. (C) Force felt
by the hand, that is , that accurately replicates the microscopic interaction.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0108895.g006

The nature and magnitude of forces during this interaction are representative
of an insect's leg adhering to a substrate [17], [18]. A similar maneuver
executed with the leg of a house fly, as reported by Figure 7, let the
experimenter directly experience the fact that the multi-scale structure of
the leg of an insect greatly magnified the interaction forces, although the
leg was actually smaller than the glass probe. The file Video S1 shows a live
ant interacting with a water droplet where the magnified interaction forces
experienced by the ant are felt by a human observer.

Download:

  * PPT 

PowerPoint slide

  * PNG 

larger image

  * TIFF 

original image

Figure 7.  Interaction of an insect leg with a droplet of water.

Similar maneuver as in Figure 6 but using a house fly leg as a probe. While
the fly's leg is of similar size than the glass probe, interaction forces are
ten fold larger with the insect leg than with the glass probe.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0108895.g007

## Discussion

The mechanical scaling instrument gave direct access to micro-scale phenomena
previously not felt by humans, although they could be seen through a
microscope and measured through conventional instruments. The probe had very
low mobility compared to the sample but high force sensitivity and the handle
had very high mobility compared to the hand and could eliminate most spurious
forces from the interaction. These combined properties provided nearly perfect
transparency without any stability trade-off so that scaling gains could be
made arbitrarily high, subject only to saturation. Other practical limits were
due to the inertia of the probe, which could be reduced through
miniaturization, and to sensing noise in the optical lever which could be
replaced by an interferometric measurement technique.

The availability of interactive manipulation at the micro-scale enables many
immediate applications ranging from the handling and probing of biomaterials
to the assembly of microstructures. Because operation is achieved through
feedback control, this technique lends itself naturally to coupling manual
control with automation, similarly to many successful applications of robotic
technologies, such as surgical robotics or robotic space exploration. Paths
for improvements include miniaturization of the probe and expansion of the
system to multiple degrees of freedom.

## Supporting Information

### Data S1.

**Raw data underlying the findings.** This compressed archive contains all the
experimental data related to our study. It is composed of a Guidelines file
(pdf) and fourteen data files in Matlab format (mat). Those data are used
within the manuscript in Figs. 4, 5A, 5B, 5C, 6B, 6C, and 7.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0108895.s001

(ZIP)

### Text S1.

**Numerical expressions of the system plant and controllers.**

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0108895.s002

(PDF)

### Video S1.

**Interaction between an ant and a droplet.** The video shows a live ant
interacting with a water droplet. The magnified interaction forces experienced
by the ant are felt by a human operator.

https://doi.org/10.1371/journal.pone.0108895.s003

(AVI)

## Author Contributions

Conceived and designed the experiments: AMO GM SH SR VH. Performed the
experiments: AMO GM. Analyzed the data: AMO GM SH SR VH. Contributed
reagents/materials/analysis tools: AMO GM SH SR VH. Wrote the paper: SH SR VH.

## References

  1. 1\. Binnig G, Quate CF, Gerber C (1986) Atomic force microscope. Phys Rev Lett 56: 930933. 
    * View Article 
    * Google Scholar 
  2. 2\. van Leeuwenhoek A (1800) The select works of Antony van Leeuwenhoek: containing his microscopical discoveries in many of the works of nature/translated from the Dutch and Latin editions published by Samuel Hoole. London: G. Sidney. 
  3. 3\. Hatamura Y, Morishita H (1990) Direct coupling system between nanometer world and human world. In: An Investigation of Micro Structures, Sensors, Actuators, Machines and Robots. IEEE, pp. 2032078. 
  4. 4\. Hannaford B (1990) Kinesthetic feedback techniques in teleoperated systems. In: Advances in control and dynamic systems, Leondes CT, editor, Academic Press, chapter 54. pp. 132. 
  5. 5\. Sitti M, Hashimoto H (1998) Tele-nanorobotics using atomic force microscope. In: IEEE/RSJ International Conference on Intelligent Robots and Systems. volume 3, pp. 17391746. 
  6. 6\. Hollis R, Salcudean S, Abraham D (1990) Toward a tele-nanorobotic manipulation system with atomic scale force feedback and motion resolution. In: Micro Electro Mechanical Systems. IEEE, pp. 115119. 
  7. 7\. Hunter IW, Lafontaine S, Nielsen PMF, Hunter PJ, Hollerbach JM (1990) Manipulation and dynamic mechanical testing of microscopic objects using a tele-micro-robot system. Control Systems Magazine 10: 39. 
    * View Article 
    * Google Scholar 
  8. 8\. Hannaford B (1989) A design framework for teleoperators with kinesthetic feedback. IEEE Transactions on Robotics and Automation 5: 426434. 
    * View Article 
    * Google Scholar 
  9. 9\. Daniel R, McAree P (1998) Fundamental limits of performance for force reflecting teleoperation. Int J Robot Res 17: 811830. 
    * View Article 
    * Google Scholar 
  10. 10\. Sidobre D, Hayward V (2004) Calibrated measurement of mechanical junctions behaviour from micrometer to subnanometer scale: The friction force scanner. Meas Sci Technol 15: 451459. 
    * View Article 
    * Google Scholar 
  11. 11\. Gosline AH, Hayward V (2008) Eddy current brakes for haptic interfaces: Design, identification, and control. IEEE/ASME Trans Mechatronics 13: 699677. 
    * View Article 
    * Google Scholar 
  12. 12\. Mohand Ousaid A, Haliyo S, Rgnier S, Hayward V (2013) Micro-force sensor by active control of a comb-drive. In: 2013 IEEE/ASME International Conference on Advanced Intelligent Mechatronics (AIM). pp. 612617. 
  13. 13\. Mohand Ousaid A, Bolopion A, Haliyo S, Rgnier S, Hayward V (2014) Stable and transparent haptic interaction with a water droplet. In: IEEE International Conference on Robotics and Automation. 
  14. 14\. Mohand Ousaid A, Millet G, Rgnier S, Haliyo S, Hayward V (2012) Haptic interface transparency achieved through viscous coupling. Int J Robot Res 31: 319329. 
    * View Article 
    * Google Scholar 
  15. 15\. Llewellyn F (1952) Some fundamental properties of transmission systems. Proceedings of the IRE 40: 271283. 
    * View Article 
    * Google Scholar 
  16. 16\. Adams RJ, Hannaford B (1999) Stable haptic interaction with virtual environments. IEEE Trans Robot Autom 15: 465474. 
    * View Article 
    * Google Scholar 
  17. 17\. Federle W, Endlein T (2004) Locomotion and adhesion: dynamic control of adhesive surface contact in ants. Arthropod Struct Dev 33: 6775. 
    * View Article 
    * Google Scholar 
  18. 18\. Sun Y, Fry SN, Potasek DP, Bell DJ, Nelson BJ (2005) Characterizing fruit fly flight behavior using a microforce sensor with a new comb-drive configuration. J Microelectromech Syst 14: 411. 
    * View Article 
    * Google Scholar 


